(GH-2738) Developer update about script loading changes (#2784)
puppetlabs/bolt: documentation/developer_updates.md

Find out what the Bolt team is working on and why we're making the decisions
we're making.

## April 2021

### How Bolt loads scripts

#### Where we are

Currently, you can point to the location of a script or file as an absolute path
or use a [Module-style load
path](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/file_serving.html). Puppet
module-style load paths use the syntax `<module_name>/<path_to_file>`, where the
`<module_name>` is the name of the module on the modulepath to load from, and
`<path_to_file>` is the path to the file within the `<module_name>/files/`
subdirectory. For example, if you provided Bolt with the path
`ruby_task_helper/task_helper.rb`, Bolt would find the `ruby_task_helper` module
on the modulepath, and look in `ruby_task_helper/files/` for the file
`task_helper.rb`. Similarly, provided the path
`powershell_task_helper/BoltPwshHelper/BoltPwshHelper.psm1`, Bolt looks in
`powershell_task_helper/files/BoltPwshHelper/` for `BoltPwshHelper.psm1`.

> Users can also load tasks and plans as first-class citizens of a module, but with a slightly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also load tasks and plans as first-class citizens of a module, but with a slightly
```

different syntax that uses double colons instead of slashes. For example, provided
the task `terraform::apply`, Bolt finds the `terraform` module on the modulepath and looks in
`terraform/tasks` for a task called `apply` (with any file extension). If you used the path 
`terraform::subdir::apply`, Bolt would look in `terraform/tasks/subdir/` for `apply`.

All of these loading methods leave out one of the most common Bolt artifacts:
scripts. You can load a script using module-style file loading, but the script
needs to be in the `files/` subdirectory of a module, not the `scripts/`
subdirectory. It's about time scripts got their due as the Bolt workhorses they

> are. That's why we're introducing specific module-style syntax for scripts.
> While "specific module-style syntax" is kind of a mouthful, it will provide a
> more elegant and comprehensible workflow for sharing and loading scripts from a
> module. With these changes, there's no magic to understanding where Bolt is
> loading a script from, and scripts are more visible as the core Bolt entities
> that they are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are. That's why we're introducing a more elegant and comprehensible workflow for sharing and loading scripts from a module. With these changes, there's no magic to understanding where Bolt is loading a script from, and scripts are more visible as the core Bolt entities
that they are.
```

#### Where we're going

> Eventually, users will be able to load files by providing
> `<module_name>/files/myfile`, and load scripts by providing
> `<module_name>/scripts/myscript.sh`. This more detailed syntax will make scripts
> first-class citizens in Bolt, and disambiguate loading files vs loading scripts
> from a module. Plus, it is easier to understand where files are coming from if
> the full path is provided, as opposed to magically looking in the `files/`
> directory for a file. Once this feature is fully rolled out, the old, magic
> syntax `<module_name>/myfile` will no longer load from the `files/` subdirectory
> of a module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eventually, you'll be able to load scripts and files using their fully qualified
names. In other words, you'll provide Bolt with a more detailed path to 
the script or file within a module. Files will remain in a module's `files` 
subdirectory, but scripts will live in a new `scripts` subdirectory. For 
example, to load a file you'll provide Bolt with a 
`<module_name>/files/myfile` path, and to load a script, you'll use the
syntax `<module_name>/scripts/myscript.sh`.

This more detailed syntax will make scripts
first-class citizens in Bolt, and disambiguate loading files vs loading scripts
from a module. Plus, it is easier to understand where files are coming from if
the fully qualified name is provided, as opposed to magically looking in the `files/`
directory for a file. Once this feature is fully rolled out, the old, magic
syntax `<module_name>/myfile` will no longer load from the `files/` subdirectory
of a module.
```

#### How we get there 🚲

This is a big change in how Bolt loads file and scripts, so it's going to take a few different
phases to transition from where we are to where we're going. Inevitably, in order for a module to
function with older versions of Bolt, module authors will need to have scripts in two places at some
point: one under the `files/` directory and one in the new location that Bolt will load from. We
know this is a burden on content authors, but we think it's worth the improved experience for users
new to the Puppet ecosystem and Bolt.

> **Phase 1**: In this phase, specific module-style syntax will be opt-in using the new `file_paths`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Phase 1**: In this phase, fully qualified names will be opt-in using the new `file_paths`
```

- Provided: `module/myscript.sh`
  - Load from `files/myscript.sh` (old behavior)
- Provided: `module/scripts/myscript.sh`
  - Load from `files/scripts/myscript.sh` (old behavior)
  - Fall back to `scripts/myscript.sh` (new behavior)
- Provided: `module/files/myscript.sh`
  - Load from `files/files/myscript.sh` (old behavior)
  - Fall back to `files/myscript.sh` (new behavior)

**Phase 2**: In this phase, we'll switch the precedence of paths that Bolt
searches: so Bolt will first look in the new location for a given path, and then
the old location. Because this is a breaking change, it will either be gated by
the same future flag as above, or will happen with a major version release.

- Provided: `module/myscript.sh`
  - Load from `files/myscript.sh` (old behavior)
- Provided: `module/scripts/myscript.sh`
  - Load from `scripts/myscript.sh` (new behavior)
  - Fall back to `files/scripts/myscript.sh` (old behavior)
- Provided: `module/files/myscript.sh`
  - Load from `files/myscript.sh` (new behavior)
  - Fall back to `files/files/myscript.sh` (old behavior)

**Phase 3**: In this phase, we will issue a deprecation warning when Bolt finds

> a script in a `files` directory, or if you provide Bolt with a non-specific
> module-style path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a script in a `files` directory, or if you provide Bolt with the old
module-style path.
```
